DISCOURSE I.
Hermes, the moft induftrious fearcher into all the fecrets of Nature, doth in his
Smaragdine Table exquifitely thus fuccinctly defcribe the Natural Work when he fays:
Wind carried Him in his belly, as if he fhould have faid that He whofe father is Sol &
mother is Luna muft, before he can be brought forth into the light, be carried by windy
fumes, even as a Bird is carried in the Air when it flies.
Now from fumes or winds (which are nothing elfe but Air in Motion) being coagulated,
Water is produced, & from Water mixed with earth all minerals & metals do proceed.
And even thefe laft are faid to confift of & be immediately coagulated from fumes, fo that
whether He be placed in Water or fume the thing is the fame; for one as well as the other
is the mafter of Wind. The fame the more remotely may be faid of Minerals & Metals, but
the Queftion is: Who is He that ought to be carried by Winds? I anfwer: Chymically it is
Sulphur which is carried in Argent Vive (contained in quickfilver), as Lully in his
Codicill cap. 32 & all other Authors atteft. [Marginal note: ìLully ibid: The wind carries
him in his belly; That is, fulphur is carried by Argent Vive; & Ch. 47: The Stone is Fire
carried in the Belly of Air.] Phyfically it is the Embryo, which in a little time ought to
be borne into the light. I fay alfo that Arithmetically it is the Root of a Cube; Mufically it
is the Difdiapafon; Geometrically it is a point, the beginning of a continued running line;
Aftronomically it is the Center of the Planets Saturn, Jupiter & Mars.
Now although thefe are different Subjects, Yet if they be well compared together they
will eafily demonftrate what the offfpring of Wind muft be. But this enquiry muft be left
to every man's own Induftry, be it remembered. But I fhall point out the matter more
plainly thus: All Mercury is compofed of fumes, that is of Water elevating Earth together
with itfelf into an aerial rarity or thinnefs, & of Earth forcing Air to return into Watery
Earth or Earthy Water; for when the Elements are in it altogether & mixed throughout &
mutually blended, fubdued & reduced to a certain Vifcous Nature, they do not eafily
recede from one another, but either follow the Volatile flying upwards, or remain below
with thofe that are fixed.
Nor is it indeed without reafon that Mercury is called the Meffenger or Interpreter & as it
were the running intermediate Minifter of the other Gods & has Wings fitted to his head
& feet; for He is Windy & flies through the air as wind itfelf, which many Perfons are
really & experimentally convinced of, to their great damage. But becaufe he carries a Rod
or Caduceus about which two ferpents are twined acrofs one the other, by which he can
draw fouls out of bodies & bring them back again & effect many fuch contrarities, He is a
moft Excellent figure or reprefentation of the Philofophical Mercury. Mercury, therefore,
is Wind, which takes Sulphur, or Dionyfius, or (if You pleafe fo to call it) Afculepius,
being yet an imperfect Embryo out of the Mothers belly or out of the Afhes of the
Mother's body burned, & carries it thither where it may be brought to maturity.
And the Embryo is Sulphur, which by the celeftial Sun is infufed into the Wind of
Boreas, that he may bring it forth in maturity. Who, after the complete time of his
Teeming, does bring forth twins, one with white Hair, Called Calais, the other with Red,
named Zethes. Thefe Sons of Boreas (as Orpheus the Chymick Poet writes) were
Companions to Jafon amongft the fet of the Argonauts when he went to fetch the Golden
Fleece from Colchis, for Phineas the blind Prophet, being infefted by the Harpies, could
not be freed from them but by thefe Sons of Boreas, & for fo great a benefit obtained by
their means, He out of gratitude fhowed the whole courfe of their way to the Argonauts.
Thefe Harpies are nothing elfe but corrupting Sulphur which is driven away by the Sons
of Boreas when they come to full age, & from a thing imperfect and molefted with
noxious and hurtful Volatiles becomes perfect & not fubject to that Evil, & afterwards
fhows Jafon its Phyfician the way how to obtain the Golden Fleece.
Bafil [Valentine] as well as other Authors takes Notice of thefe Winds & in his fixth Key
fays thus: ìFor there ought to come a double Wind named Vulturnus & a fingle Wind
called Notus which will blow impetuoufly from the Eaft & the South, upon the ceffation
of whofe motion fo that Water is made of their Air. You may confidently believe that a
Corporeal thing will be made of a Spiritual. & Ripley, Gate 8th, fays that our infant
ought to be born again in Air, that is, in the Belly of the Wind. In the fame fenfe may that
be taken which we find in Scala Philofophorum Degree the 6th: ìYou muft know that the
Son of the Wife is born in the Air, & Degree 8th: ìAiry Spirits afcending together into
the Air do love one another; as Hermes faid, the Wind carried him in his Belly, becaufe
the generation of our Son is made in the Air, & being born in the Air is born Wifely, for
he afcends from Earth to Heaven, & again defcends to Earth acquiring both the fuperiour
& inferiour Virtue.
