DISCOURSE II.
It is determined by the Peripatetic & other Philofophers of found Judgment that the
thing nourifhing muft be converted into the fubftance of the nourifhed & made like to it,
not before but after it has received an alteration, & this is admitted as an undoubted
axiom. For how fhould the thing nourifhing, fuppofing it beforehand to be like to, or the
fame with the thing nourifhed, have need of any change in its effence, which if it fhould
happen would hinder it from remaining the fame or alike. For how fhould thofe things
be received for nourifhment which cannot be converted into a like fubftance with the
thing nourifhed, as wood, ftones, &c. As therefore the firft is vain fo the fecond is
contrary to Nature.
But for an infant newborn to be nourifhed with the Milk of Animals is a thing not
repugnant to Nature, for milk will become of the like fubftance with it, but more eafily if
it be fucked from the Mother than any other Creature. Wherefore Phyficians conclude
that it conduces to the health & ftrength of an infant as likewife to the conformity of
temper & manners if it is always fed & nourifhed by the milk of its own Mother, & that
the contrary happens if it is done by that of a Stranger. This is the Univerfal Harmony of
Nature: That Like delights in its Like & as far as it can poffibly follows its footfteps in
everything by a certain tacit confent & agreement. The fame thing happens of courfe in
the Natural work of the Philofophers, which is equally governed by Nature in its
Formation as an Infant in its Mother's womb. And although as Father, Mother & even a
Nurfe be afcribed to it by way of fimilitude, Yet it is not more Artificial than the
generation of every Animal.
Two feeds are by a pleafurable Artifice joined together by Animals & both the Human
fexes which being united by fucceffive Alteration produce an Embryo which grows & is
increafed, acquires life & motion, & then is nourifhed by Milk. But it is neceffary for a
Woman in the time of Conception & impregnation to be very temperate in heat, Food,
drink, Motion, Reft & all things elfe; otherwife Abortion will follow & deftruction of the
conceived Embryo, which Obfervation in the fix non-naturals becaufe it is prefcribed by
the Phyficians according to their Art is alfo Artificial. After the fame manner, if the feeds
be not joined together in the Philofophical Work, they ought to be joined, but if they
could anywhere be found joined together as the feed of a Cock & Hen do fubfift together
& are contained in one Egg, then would the Philofophersí work be more natural that the
generation of Animals.
But let us grant (as the Philofophers do affert) that one comes from the Eaft & the other
from the Weft & are made one: what more is as miniftered to 'em than mixture in their
own Veffel, Temperate Heat, and Nutriment. The Veffel is indeed Artificial, but in this
there is no more difference than if the neft were made by the Hen herfelf or made for her
by the Country Dame in fome convenient place as commonly it is. The Generation of
Eggs & Hatching of Chickens from them will be the fame. Heat is a Natural thing,
whether it proceed from the Temperate Heat of furnaces, putrefaction of Dung, from the
6
Sun & Air, from the Bowels of the Mother, or otherwife. Thus the AEgyptian from his
Furnaces does by Art Adminifter a Natural Heat for the Hatching of Eggs. The feeds of
Silk worms & even Hensí Eggs are faid to have been Hatched by the Warmth of a
Virgin's breafts. Art, therefore, & Nature, do mutually join hands & officiate one for the
other. Neverthelefs, Nature is always the Miftrefs & art the Handmaid.
But a doubt may [be] raifed how the Earth may be faid to be the NURSE of the
Philofophical Infant, feeing it is the Element which is moft dry & void of Juice, infomuch
that Drynefs appertains to it as its proper quality. It may be anfwered that Earth
Elemented is to be underftood, & not the Element of Earth, whofe Nature we have fully
explained in the firft day of our Philofophical Week. This Earth is the Nurfe of Caelum or
Heaven, not by opening, wafhing, or moiftening the Infant, but by coagulating, fixing,
coloring and converting it into more Juice & Blood. For Nutrition implies an
Augmentation in length, breadth & Depth which extends itfelf through all the
Dimenfions of a Body, & feeing this can be afforded & adminiftered to the Philofophical
Infant by Earth only, it can in no wife be improper to call the Earth by the name of his
NURSE. But this admirable Juice of Earth has a quality different from other kinds of
Milk which are converted & do not convert for this by reafon of its moft efficacious
Virtue does mightily alter the Nature of the thing Nourifhed, as the Milk of the Wolf is
believed to have difpofed the Body of Romulus to a Nature that was Magnanimous &
prepenfe to War.
